Okay, we are rolling tape on this end. Okay. Let's start out with, how did the
-oh, one more thing. Whenever you're talking, I shut my line down so that I
don't get any interference on this end. So maybe a few seconds after you stop
talking before I come back on. Okay. Let's start out with, how did the Dark
Crystal Movie Project get started? Well, I first began on Dark Crystal just over
five years ago. And I took the idea of doing a film like this to Lou Grade, who
was the man responsible for putting The Muppet Show in the air, and suggested
that we do a film. He loved the idea, and he said, but why don't we do a film
first with the regular Muppet Show characters? and so that became the Muppet
movie but he said great we'll do The Dark Crystal also so we started it way back
then and then I was working with Brian Froud on this concept we continued to
work for the next few years putting Dark Crystal together
Okay, how did the... Could you go into a little bit of detail of how the
storyline developed? Well, let's see, the story of Dark Crystal came pretty much
from... Oh, let's see, it grew out of conversations with my daughters probably
most of all. Lisa and I were talking about the idea of doing a mythic fairy tale
and we had just done the characters for Saturday Night Live and we found that
was sort of an interesting departure for us the characters were more realistic
we used taxidermist eyes they looked more like real living creatures and we
thought wouldn't it be interesting to take this little bit further so that we
end up with something that actually looks like a living breathing thing and set
it in a whole fantasy world. That was kind of the challenge was to create this
entire world. About that time I brought Brian Frout into it. We worked, we
operated for the first year on just the vaguest of outlines knowing basically
what the story was going to be about. But I wanted to design the characters
first. Then after we had the characters together, the storyline grew. And
actually, I was looking for a time to actually put this story down, to write it
down. I needed a couple of days cleared. And I was about to fly over to England
with my daughter Cheryl, who was about 16 or 17, I guess, at the time. and we
got stranded at Kennedy Airport in a blizzard. We were stuck at Howard Johnson's
motor lodge for two days in the blizzard of 77.
During those two days, we had a wonderful time, and during that time, we put the
basic working story together that did become the story outline for the Dark
Crystal.
Okay, so it was part of a, kind of a family affair. Yes, I've always
tended to work with my kids quite a bit, I think.
Okay, just to give a bit of background, what types of characters or creatures
inhabit the world of Dark Crystal? Well, they're very different from anything
that we've ever done. And for that reason, we are not using the name Muppets in
connection with this film, or even puppetry, because it's something rather
different from either Muppets or Puppets, in that these are creatures. Some of
the creatures are small, like hand puppets, but some of them are great big,
large things that with people inside, they weigh 75 pounds. They're bigger.
There are some things that are about 10 feet tall. So we're into all kinds of
different creatures. And they were all designed by Brian Froud, who's the
English fantasy illustrator. and Brian has done just a wonderful job of
designing both the creatures, their costumes, the entire world, the landscape,
the castles, all of that was designed by Brian. But it has a very different look
and it doesn't look anything like anything we've ever done before.
I take it Brian sort of storyboarded the idea down in. He was doing design work,
but actually we had other people doing storyboards for the whole film. Okay. Um,
first we could go into a little bit — you talked a little bit about the design
of the creatures. Could you go into that just a little bit more? Possibly how
they're manufactured or how they're put together? well what the normal process
and the reason that it sort of took a number of years to accomplish this film
was that Brian would do an original sketch and then we would turn that we would
go to have one of our sculptors then sculpt the figure and then we would mock it
up so that we could manipulate it and then we would try moving this thing, and
these things moved in different ways. We would videotape a test, and then we'd
all sit around and look at the test and decide what should be done about it. And
then Brian would normally redesign the character. The whole process would begin
again, and we would go through sometimes like five generations of a character
before we ended up with what we actually shot on film. all. So that's one of the
reasons it was a long development. Yeah, I think you had to go back creating all
new brand new creatures yet making them, I guess, realistic enough so that when
somebody looked at them, they could accept them as being a creature. Yeah,
right. The whole problem was whether or not we could design a world that the
audience would believe. that you would believe that this was a world with all
the depth in our own world there are so many things that you look around and you
accept a very complicated world but all these things have a sort of a depth to
them, there's a lot of stuff behind everything and so in that sense Brian went
about designing these creatures the whole culture the symbolism behind the
different kinds of creatures and their lifestyles. We would spend a lot of time
sitting around talking about what these people ate and how they ate, how they
acted towards each other and the kind of clothes that are evil creatures where
they're skinny, bony creatures. and we figure they're nearly a thousand years
old, and they wear layer upon layer upon layer of clothing, and we figure they
never took their clothes off. They only added a new layer on top, and it was all
kind of really awful, and we figured it probably smelled terrible. But it was
all brocades and rich, very rich fabrics. So, you know, it's that kind of thing.
You go through the thinking process of what this evolution was. And you do that
not only for the creatures but for their environment and the places where they
live.
We've talked with a lot of science fiction and fantasy authors about world
-building concepts, and they find that sometimes designing and building the
world, is the challenge of doing that is more exciting than that all the story
that comes about afterwards? Well, all of this for us kind of happened at the
same time. You know, it was kind of a joint thing. Whereas the story has to do
with
the story is very much an organic part of how these creatures are and the
trouble that they're in at the moment. the story begins when this world is at a
point of crisis. So our story is very much part of the whole thing.
Yeah, now I'm probably getting real clear on that. What I meant was, they're
designing the world. Lots of times when they get to the story afterwards, they
have to work bedly hard in order to make the story as exciting as the world of
the design. Oh, yeah. I can see that as a potential pitfall, certainly. We got
into things where it would be lovely. We spent a lot of time working on areas of
the film that never got photographed even. We worked a great deal on what the
plant life was like and we had many kinds of plants that were sort of halfway
between plants and animals. We had these trees that would walk around, and we
had areas of the mud that was alive. But a lot of that stuff, most of that
stuff, did not end up in the finished film, because when you are doing a story,
the story has to take precedence. And that stuff is also serving a useful
function to the story that you're telling. it doesn't end up in film.
But from our standpoint it was very valuable to have gone through this process
to know what's there. We know what's on the other side of that tree that you're
not seeing. Yeah, I would tend to think that would make it the realism of the
scene come more alive for you and you'd be able to pass that on when you found
it. Yeah, I think so. otherwise you end up with just a surface. I think we have
something here that has more depth to it because of the time that we put into
that.
Okay, can we talk a little bit about the different types of characters, the
skeksis, and is it gelfling? Yeah, the gelflings are sort of the closest thing to
human beings. It's a young male and female gelfling, which are the leads really
the story revolves around them and I was performing Jen the male gelfling and
then we have the mystics mystics are sort of big ancient old wizards there's
nine of them and they live in a area called mystic valley and they've raised Jen
from a baby Keira, the female Gelfling, was raised by the pod people these are
sort of like the peasants that live out in the woods
then the bad guys are the Skeksis and there are nine of them also these are
these ancient creatures that have been inhabiting the castle they are in control
of the land because they also control the Dark Crystal, which is this very large
crystal that floats inside the castle.
And so let's see, what else? The Skeksis have sort of a troop of soldiers which
are called Gartham. Are we okay with that sound? It's a bit, I can filter some
of that out, I think, when we reprocess. That's very strange. Is it on the line
or is that in your recorder? It must be on the line between here and New York.
Do you want me to call you back? If you want to I can call you back, it doesn't
matter. Let's see, we've placed the call, why don't they call you? And you're,
let's see, it's still 3356647? Let me go ahead and give you the studio number.
It's 335-6648. 48. Okay. I'll call you right back. All righty.
Okay. Let me get the recorders going again here. There's a different kind of
noise on it. Yeah. We're getting a good signal here. Okay. We just got through
talking about the various creatures. You and Frank Oz co-directed the pictures,
is that right? Yes, that's right. How does something like that work? How does
one co-direct a picture? Well, we were both performing in this film, which is
one of the reasons that co-directing made sense, because when you're inside a
set and you're actually performing, it's rather difficult to be the person
outside that's running the film unit and also seeing the scene with a sense of
perspective. So we found it very useful. Generally, if I was performing, Frank
was kind of running things and vice versa. And we worked very closely together
throughout the whole pre-production and post-production. And Frank and I have
worked together for many years, So it's not an uncomfortable thing at all. We
think very much alike. And our image of this film, I think, was something that
we, you know, shared the feelings of. So it was quite an easy process.
Okay. Um, I read up and researched, and I believe I saw a special on PBS not
long ago on, I bet you hosted on puppetry. and it went into how y'all produce
the show and everything. But could you give a little bit of a sort of visual
explanation of what it's like on a set? Well, let's see. Because we were
operating most of these characters from below, the sets were all built about
four feet off the floor. And we would be operating with a, oh, sometimes through
holes in the floor or sometimes a character would be there and there would be
several people around operating cables going to one particular character. If you
saw the credits on ET, you saw how many people were credited with operating ET.
And we had dozens of characters that were all about that complicated. So you can
imagine we would have lots and lots of performers. and we were always using a
video system, a through-the-lent television camera, so we would be operating
with television monitors. If I was inside a character operating him, I would be
wearing a television monitor on my chest and all the other people who were
helping to operate that same character would also be watching television
monitors. So it was that kind of a process.
Sort of high-tech artistry. Yes, yes. We're using a lot of different kinds of
technical and special effect mechanisms, radio control, marionette rigs, all of
these things. But basically, they're all ways of assisting the performer create
a performance. So despite the fact that it's high-tech, I really think of it as
assisting
a performance to happen because that is what everything revolves around, the
quality of the performance itself.
Yes, that's very good. Very good explanation. Let's see. This was filmed over in
England, right? Yes, we were shooting at the L3 Studios, the same ones that have
done Star Wars and Raiders of the Lost Heart. We did The Great Muppet Caper
there also.
Why was it shot over in England? Any particular reason? Mostly because we were
there doing The Muppet Show, also in Elstry. And this film studio is about two
blocks from where we were working. And I wanted to go straight from the end of
The Muppet Show into The Great Muppet Caper. So while we were still doing that
television show, we were doing the pre-production for the movie. If I had
decided to do that in the United States, we probably would've had to do it about
eight months later.
You're talking a little while ago about some of the scenes and where you had to
work from a hole underneath the set and stuff like that. Did you have a... I
enjoyed reading a description of how you manipulated Kermit when you were doing
the Muppet movie and the first scene in the swamp. Did you have any scenes that
were as difficult is that Manning was at the USS Henson submarine that you were
in? Well, let's see. I don't think – we never had anything that was quite that
claustrophobic.
I mean, fortunately, I'm not a claustrophobic person, so I don't mind being
sprinched into a small space. But in the Muppet movie, in the great Muppet
caper, we would very often find ourselves in a situation where we were out in
the real world like riding in a taxi cab where there might be three or four of
us jammed underneath where the seat would have been in a regular automobile. But
since this film was all in a fantasy world which was designed for us to operate
in, we virtually never had that same kind of discomfort. So all of our sets were
designed with knowing that we wanted to be able to get underneath the ground or
through a rock wall. So all of it was designed with trap doors or areas that
could be removed.
Yeah, okay. The basic premise behind the story is, I guess, the eternal conflict
between good and evil. Well, it's that sort of thing. The basic story really
relates to a young man growing up, facing the world, facing the evil powers and
the unknown, and conquering fear. So in that sense, it's a very standard thing,
standard fairytale myth basic story. But then on top of that, I think the actual
story that we're telling is interesting and has sort of its own strange
variations of this world.
yeah from reading Brian's book I think people are really going to be able to get
into the characters because of how well y'all developed him I hope so yes that
is certainly our desire intent okay one more last question here on Dark Crystal
because of all the work you did on developing the characters in the world
anything like that Do you think there might be another Dark Crystal movie
somewhere in the future? Well, the story itself is complete in itself and so it
doesn't lend itself to Dark Crystal 2 I don't think there will be a sequel as
such We could set another story in this same world but I think we're kind of
waiting until after this film opens to see how we feel about that Yeah Yeah,
they had several fantasy movies out this summer, but none of them really seemed
to capture the genre. In fact, I guess one of the last and best was The Wizard
of Oz, and I was quite a part of it. So in that sense, I really hope you're
successful at that because I really enjoyed the fantasy stories. Yes, to us it
was a wonderful challenge. It was something we had a great time doing. and
whether or not we are or we will be successful at it is something I have no idea
yet. We won't really know until the film opens.
Yeah, sort of a calculated gamble in that sense. Yeah. Okay. You still okay on
time? Well, I'm late, but okay. I wanted to get just a little bit of background
information on how you got started and the various programs that you worked on
and stuff like that. And we can make this kind of brief if you'd like. Sure.
Okay. The first question, of course, is how did you get started in all this?
Well, I started just out of high school on local television in Washington, D.C.
I started doing a little puppet show there that was on late at night. It was an
11.25 in the evening five-minute show. And I had that show while I was going to
college and for the next few years. And during that time, the style of the
Muppets sort of came together. Then I moved up to New York and started doing
guest shots on variety shows and did the Jimmy Dean show, which was a country
western show with our dog, Rolf. We did that for three years. did the Ed
Sullivan show for a while, and about that time, Sesame Street came along. Sesame
Street, we're in the process of working on our 14th season right now, so that's
something that is still a part of our operation here. And The Muppet Show came
along about, like, seven years ago, I guess. we did The Muppet Show we did 5
years of that which was 120 shows and they're dispersed in all of this our
various and sundry television specials and a lot of guest shots that sort of
brings us up to date I guess I suppose
I guess it's kind of funny but wasn't River Duckies what really put you on the
map? Which one? Remember the song Rubber Ducky? Rubber Ducky? Isn't that sort of
what really put you on the map and grabbed a lot of public attention? I never
would have thought of that. It may have. Rubber Ducky came out in the first
season of Sesame Street and I think it made it to close to the top ten. Not
quite all. I don't think it got up to about number 10. I don't think it got any
higher than that nationally. But I think probably Sesame Street itself was
something that the general audience became aware of us. Although before that, I
think we were mostly known in the industry, I guess. Yeah, I can remember
watching Sesame Street when it came out and really enjoying your work because
the humor that you put into it seemed to be written on two levels. Adults would
laugh at one thing, kids would laugh at another. Yeah. It was a fairly conscious
decision in that we've always known that the television set is controlled by not
only the little kids but also their parents and their older brothers and
sisters. That sort of thing. yeah could you give a brief reason as to how you
design the Muppets rather than working with traditional puppets or marionettes
well let's see I don't know when I started let's see I started with no
connection with any normal puppeteers or anything so I guess you know, not
having a background in it, nor knowing hardly anything about it, I started in
probably a fresh direction, coming mostly from just a different place, I
suppose. Do you suppose it might have been that you're working in the medium of
television that caused you to use the design where you could have more, I guess,
facial expression on your characters rather than the static expression on
marionettes and whatnot? Yeah, oh, certainly. Certainly. The fact that all of
our original characters were designed just for television. We were probably one
of the first people to do that because even Bert Kilstrom, whose work I had
seen, and probably he was likely the major influence on me, I suppose, but even
his work had started before television. and so it wasn't particularly designed
for the medium.
Okay. When did you meet Frank Oz and form that sort of collaborative effort with
him? Well, Frank joined us about in 1960,
maybe 1964 or 5, just before we started doing the Jimmy Dean Show. He was a kid
at the time and so he was with me in a lot of the early days of our development
and then slowly started doing voices. and a lot of his voice things really came
into really great shape about the time we started on Sesame Street.
Yeah, I think Frank's name is just highly appropriate for what he does. Yes.
Speaking of voices, I know this, but this is just for the audience. Who does
which voice is the really popular characters? Well, let's see. Frank does Fozzie
Bear. Fozzie was sort of named for Frank Oz, too. I don't know if people realize
that. But Frank does Fozzie and Piggy, Animal, Sam Eagle, on the Muppet Show, on
Sesame Street he does Cookie Monster, Grover, Brute, and in Dark Crystal he's
doing a character named Ogra. And he does The Chamberlain So Those are two of
the major characters In The Dark Crystal Let's see What else? I do a character
named Jen In The Dark Crystal And I was also performing On The Skeksis, The
Ritual Master So more or less incidental character And on The Muppet Show I do
Kermit Roth Waldorf, the chef, a few others, like Dr. T. On Sesame Street, the
only characters I'm doing there are Ernie.
Kermit the Frog occasionally works on Sesame Street still.
You and Frank are both men, right? Yes, that's right. Okay. The well and the
hearty of the Muppet world. Yes, we've been doing that for a long time. And it's
still a long time. We still have a good time doing that stuff. I can remember. I
don't even remember where I saw this. But I thought it was on the Muppet Show
because of Sesame Street. It was a segment where the Swedish chef was making a
sandwich. And the subtitles were all in Chinese. Hmm. Well, that was the first
time we used the Swedish Chef. And that was something, I'm quite sure this was,
when on a pilot special we did for ABC. Many years ago, it was called A Muppet
Show. Okay, that must be, I remember laughing so hard that I cried when I saw
that. That was so hilarious. Gee, that's nice. That's nice. I've got to look at
that show. I haven't seen that show myself in a long time. Okay, well, I think
I've about covered... Oh, I have a guess here. If I was going to make a guess, I
would guess that you're a computer games fan. Would I be guessing right? It's
interesting. Not particularly. I grew up playing a lot of games, and I enjoy
computer games, but I sort of never get around to doing it. I guess I have a
busy life, and I don't... You know, we had an Atari... We have an Atari unit at
home for the kids, which I've enjoyed playing some of those games. But I haven't
really gotten into it. Okay. Missed my mark, what can I say? If a person was
interested in doing what you do or going to work for somebody like you, what
type of area would they study in, work in, do? What type of person are you
looking for? Let's see. Well, I don't know. So it's different kinds of things.
As a performer, for performers, I look for people who work with a sense of humor
and a kind of ability of performing and focusing their performance in their
hands. There are specific things one looks for in terms of puppeteering.
But the whole film business right now is a very exciting time. And everybody is
on the lookout for people with a lot of talent.
Okay, well I'll take up plenty of your time there. I certainly do appreciate you
taking time out to talk with me. Okay, good Dave. It was a pleasure. Okay,
whenever we get the tapes cut together, I'll send you a copy of the completed
shows. Great. That would be very nice. Okay. Thank you. Thank you much, Mr.
Henson. Bye-bye. Bye-bye.